title: "Learning to Read x86 Assembly Language"
date: 2016/11/26

<div style="float: right; padding: 0px 0px 30px 30px; text-align: center; line-height:16px">
  <img src="https://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2016/11/26/8086.jpg"><br/>
  <i>A 16-bit Intel 8086 microprocessor from 1978<br/>
	<small>(source: <a href="https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:L_intel-c8086.jpg">RodolfoNeres via Wikimedia Commons</a>)</small></i>
</div>

Writing assembly language is something best left for the experts. To write code
that runs directly on your microprocessor you need to know how memory
segmentation works, what the intended use of each register is, how codes
executes in real and protected modes and much, much more. And, of course,
modern compilers will usually produce faster, more optimized code than you ever
could, without making any mistakes.

_Reading_ assembly language, on the other hand, isn’t nearly as difficult and can
be a useful skill to have: Someday you might need to debug code without having
the original source. You’ll begin to understand what a microprocessor can and
can’t do by reading it’s language directly. And you’ll appreciate and
understand your favorite programming language even more after seeing your own
code translated into low level machine instructions.

But most importantly, learning about assembly language can be a lot of fun.

*Update*: Akhmad Karimov just posted [a Russian translation of this
article](https://vectorified.com/ru-x86-assembly-language) on his [web
site](https://vectorified.com). 

## Usually Reading Assembly Language Is No Fun At All

Unfortunately, most of us only see assembly language after something has gone
wrong, terribly wrong, when we encounter something like this:

<img src="https://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2016/11/26/segfault.png"/>

This is what a segmentation fault looks like in a debugger. The debugger shows
me assembly language because it doesn’t know what else to show me. A
“segmentation fault” means one of the assembly language instructions, for
example the <span class="code">movb $0x6c, 0x1(%rax)</span> line above, has
tried to write to a portion of memory which it is not allowed to.

It’s no wonder that most of us dislike reading low level code like this. We
only ever see it when we’re in the midst of debugging something, when the
language and tools we normally rely on have let us down. We never see assembly
language under happier circumstances; it is always the bearer of bad news.

## Converting My Own Code to Assembly Language

This week I had some free time and decided to read some assembly language just
for fun. I wanted to read low level code that was working properly, not code
that was overwriting some other process's memory. I wanted to see if I could
understand it like any other programming language. To make things easier, I
decided to translate some of my own code into assembly language so I could
focus on the assembly language syntax. It was easier to figure out what the
instructions meant because I knew what they were doing.


I’m a Ruby developer, and so I was interested in knowing how my Ruby code would
look translated into assembly language. Unfortunately, the Ruby interpreter (at
least the standard “MRI” version of Ruby) never does this. Instead, the Ruby
interpreter itself is compiled into machine language and runs my code using a
virtual machine. But I wanted to see what a real machine would do, not a
virtual one.

Instead I decided to use [Crystal](https://crystal-lang.org), a variation on
Ruby that uses [LLVM](http://llvm.org) to compile Ruby to native machine
language before running it. And because the LLVM system can also produce an
assembly language version of the code it produces, using Crystal was the
perfect way for me to see my Ruby code translated so a microprocessor could
understand it.

I started by writing an extremely simple program that adds 42 to a given
integer:

<pre type="ruby">
def add_forty_two(n)
  n+42  
end

puts add_forty_two(10)
</pre>

This was both Ruby code:

<pre>
$ ruby add_forty_two.rb 
52
</pre>

And Crystal code:

<pre>
$ crystal add_forty_two.rb
52
</pre>

Both produced the same result, of course. But only Crystal could produce a copy
in assembly language:  

<pre>
$ crystal build add_forty_two.rb --emit asm
</pre>

This created a file called add\_forty\_two.s which contained 10,000s of lines of
assembly language code. (Most of this was the compiled version of the Crystal
runtime library.) I opened add\_forty\_two.s in a text editor and searched for
“add\_forty\_two,” the name of my function. First I found the call site, the code
that calls my add\_forty\_two function:

<img src="https://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2016/11/26/call-site.png"/>

I’ll return to this a bit later. Searching again I found the x86 assembly
language version of my function:

<img src="https://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2016/11/26/code1.png"/>

Next, I deleted all of the assembler directives, such as <span
class="code">.globl</span> and <span class="code">.cfi\_offset.</span> Someday
it would be interesting to learn about these, but I wanted to focus on the
actual machine instructions. And finally I pasted the the remaining code inside
of my Ruby function.

Then I saw what my computer actually does when it executes <span
class="code">add\_forty\_two</span>:

<img src="https://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2016/11/26/code2.png"/>

## x86 Assembly Language: Almost Easy to Read

This code is _almost_ easy to follow. I can guess what each instruction means:
push, add, move, etc., but I can’t quite follow what’s going on here. <span
class="code">mov</span> probably means to move, but what is the computer
moving? And from where to where? 

<div style="float: right; padding: 20px 0px 0px 30px; text-align: center; line-height:16px">
  <img src="https://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2016/11/26/budapest.jpg"><br/>
  <i>Was x86 assembly language designed in Hungary?</i>
</div>

The problem is that x86 assembly language was designed by Hungarians. I don’t
mean that literally; in fact, I have no idea who designed x86 assembly
language. I mean that x86 code reminds me of the Hungarian language.

I lived in Budapest for about a year in 1992 and managed to become
conversational in Hungarian, although I’ve forgotten all of it since. A
beautiful language, Hungarian is notoriously difficult for foreigners to learn.
Related only to Finnish and Estonian, its grammar doesn’t resemble Italian,
French or other romance languages; nor does it resemble Russian or any of the
other Slavic languages from Eastern Europe.

The one bit of Hungarian grammar I still remember is that instead of using
separate words for prepositions, such as inside, outside, etc., you append
different suffixes to the target word. For example “inside the house” would be
_a házban_. House is _ház_ while inside is _ban_. Similarly “in Budapest” would
be _Budapesten_ - the _en_ suffix means “in.” x86 assembly language code
reminds me of Hungarian. You don’t use <span class="code">mov</span> to move
something; you use <span class="code">movq</span>. You don’t <span
class="code">add</span> something; you use the <span class="code">addl</span>
instruction.

It turns out x86 assembly is much simpler than Hungarian; there are only a few
simple suffixes that refer to the size of the data you are operating on. Here
are two examples:

<img src="https://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2016/11/26/addl1.png"/>

The <span class="code">addl</span> instruction really means “add long,” where
“long” refers to a 4 byte or 32 bit value. In Crystal, it corresponds to the
<span class="code">Int32</span> type, which is the default integer type and the
type my <span class="code">add\_forty\_two</span> method uses.

Here’s another example:

<img src="https://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2016/11/26/movq1.png"/>

The letter _q_ refers to a “quad” word, or an 8 byte or 64 bit value. Most x86
code these days works with 64 bit or 32 bit values, so you’ll most often see
instructions that end with _q_ or _l_. Other suffixes are _w_ for word (16 bits
or 2 bytes) or _b_ for 1 byte or 8 bits.

## x86 Registers

But what about all of the operands of the instructions? Why do they all have a
"%" prefix, such as <span class="code">%rsp</span> or <span
class="code">%edi</span>? Reading x86 assembly language also reminds me of
reading Perl code. Lots of punctuation symbols for no apparent reason.  Similar
to Perl, x86 assembly language uses _sigils_ or magical punctuation characters
to indicate the type of each operand value.

Here are my two example instructions again:

<img src="https://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2016/11/26/addl2.png"/>

Here the "$" symbol means the 42 is a literal or “immediate” value. As you
might guess, this is the line of code that adds 42 to something. But what does
it add it to? From the "%" character we can see the x86 code is adding 42 to
the <span class="code">edi</span> register.

And what is a register? In a nutshell, the microprocessor inside your computer
uses registers to hold values while your code is running. So the instruction
above adds 42 to whatever value is contained in the <span
class="code">edi</span> register, and saves it back into <span
class="code">edi</span>.

Here’s the second example again:

<img src="https://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2016/11/26/movq2.png"/>

This instruction, <span class="code">movq</span>, refers to two registers:
<span class="code">rsp</span> and <span class="code">rbp</span>. As you can
guess, it moves whatever value is found in the <span class="code">rsp</span>
register to the <span class="code">rbp</span> register.

How many registers are there? What are they called? Let’s look at them using
LLDB:

<pre>
(lldb) register read
General Purpose Registers:
       rax = 0x0000000100300268
       rbx = 0x0000000000000000
       rcx = 0x00007fffd8132201  libsystem_kernel.dylib`__shmsys + 9
       rdx = 0x0000000000000000
       rdi = 0x000000000000000a
       rsi = 0x00007fff5fbff898
       rbp = 0x00007fff5fbffa30
       rsp = 0x00007fff5fbff908
        r8 = 0x0000000100014b60  add`sigfault_handler
        r9 = 0x0000000100400000
       r10 = 0x0000000000000000
       r11 = 0x0000000000000206
       r12 = 0x0000000000000000
       r13 = 0x0000000000000000
       r14 = 0x0000000000000000
       r15 = 0x0000000000000000
       rip = 0x0000000100013cd0  add`*add_forty_two<Int32>:Int32
    rflags = 0x0000000000000202
        cs = 0x000000000000002b
        fs = 0x0000000000000000
        gs = 0x0000000000000000
</pre>

You can see there are over 20 registers inside my Mac’s Intel CPU, each
containing a 64 bit or 8 byte value. LLDB shows the values in hexadecimal. I
don’t have time today to explain what all of these registers are used for, but
here are a few highlights:

* <span class="code">rax</span>, <span class="code">rbx</span>, <span
class="code">rcx</span> and <span class="code">rdx</span> are general purpose
registers used to hold on to intermediate values loaded from memory or used
during a calculation of some kind.

* <span class="code">rsp</span> is the stack pointer, which holds the memory
location of the top of the stack.

* <span class="code">rbp</span> is the base pointer, which holds the memory
location of the base of the current stack frame

* <span class="code">rip</span> is the instruction pointer, which holds the
memory location of the next instruction to execute

* and <span class="code">rflags</span> holds a series of flags, used by
comparison instructions for example.

In fact, there are many more registers in a modern x86 microprocessor; LLDB is
only showing me the most commonly used registers. For a complete explanation,
the definitive guide to all of this is the [Intel Software Developer’s
Manual](http://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/processors/architectures-software-developer-manuals.html).
Fortunately, my function’s assembly language code only uses a few registers. I
don’t need to understand them all.

<div style="padding: 30px 0px 30px 0px; text-align: center; line-height:16px">
<img width="100%" src="https://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2016/11/26/registers.svg"/>
<i>Registers available in the x86 instruction set<br/>
	<small>(source: <a href="https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Table_of_x86_Registers_svg.svg">Immae via Wikimedia Commons</a>)</small></i>
</div>

But wait a minute. Why does my <span class="code">addl</span> instruction refer
to the <span class="code">edi</span> register? This isn’t in the list of
registers shown by LLDB. Where does this add operation occur? What register
does it use?

It’s those Hungarian designers again. It turns out that x86 assembly language
also decorates the register names to indicate their sizes, similar to what we
saw above with the instruction name suffixes. But for register names x86 syntax
uses prefixes, not suffixes. (In C programming _Hungarian notation_ actually
refers to the practice of using prefixes on variable names to indicate their
type.)

What? This is a crazy! Why would any programming language use prefixes to
indicate data size in one place, but then use suffixes to indicate the same
thing somewhere else?  To understand this, you have to remember that assembly
language syntax wasn’t developed overnight. Instead, it gradually evolved of
the course of many years. Originally, the registers used simple two letter
names: <span class="code">ax</span>, <span class="code">bx</span>, <span
class="code">cx</span>.  <span class="code">dx</span>, <span
class="code">sp</span> and <span class="code">ip</span>. These were the
registers on the original 8086 16-bit microprocessor from the 1970s. Later in
the 1980s when Intel built 32 bit microprocessors, starting with the 80386,
they renamed (or _extended_) the <span class="code">ax</span>, <span
class="code">bx</span>, <span class="code">cx</span>, etc., registers to become
<span class="code">eax</span>, <span class="code">ebx</span>, <span
class="code">ecx</span>, etc. These were later renamed again to <span
class="code">rax</span>, <span class="code">rbx</span> etc. for 64-bit
processors.

<img src="https://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2016/11/26/register.png"/>

As you can see here, even today x86 assembly code can refer to the same
register using many different names, for example <span class="code">al</span>
or <span class="code">ah</span> for 8-bits, <span class="code">ax</span> bit 16
bits, <span class="code">eax</span> for 32 bits and <span
class="code">rax</span> for 64 bits.

## x86 Assembly Language: Reads Left to Right, Except When It Reads Right to Left

Returning to the move instruction from above, how do we know which way the move
happens?

<img src="https://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2016/11/26/movq2.png"/>

That is, does this instruction move data from <span class="code">rsp</span> to
<span class="code">rbp</span>? Or from <span class="code">rbp</span> to <span
class="code">rsp</span>?  Does it read left to right, or right to left?

It could be either! It turns out there are two versions of x86
syntax: "AT&T or GNU Assembler (GAS)" syntax, which I’ve been using until now,
and also "Intel" syntax. GAS reads left to right:

<div style="padding: 30px 0px 30px 0px; line-height:16px; width: 300px">
<img src="https://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2016/11/26/movq3.png"/><br/>
<center><i>AT&T/GAS syntax</i></center>
</div>

But equally valid and common is the Intel syntax, which reads right to left:

<div style="padding: 30px 0px 30px 0px; line-height:16p; width: 300px">
<img src="https://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2016/11/26/movq4.png"/><br/>
<center><i>Intel syntax</i></center>
</div>

If you see Perl-like sigils (<span class="code">%rsp</span> and <span
class="code">%rbp</span> for example) then you’re reading GAS syntax and values
will move from left to right. If you don’t see any "%" or "$" signs, then you
have Intel syntax and values move right to left. Also notice the Intel syntax
doesn’t append “q” or “l” on to the instruction names. [This
article](http://www.imada.sdu.dk/Courses/DM18/Litteratur/IntelnATT.htm) does a
great job explaining the differences between the two styles.

What a train wreck! It’s hard to imagine a more confusing state of affairs. But
again, remember all of this has evolved over the course of 40 years. It wasn’t
designed by any single person at any one time. There’s a tremendous amount of
history behind each x86 assembly language instruction.

## Executing My Simple Program

Now that I understand the basics of x86 assembly language syntax, I’m ready to
return to my <span class="code">add_forty_two</span> code and to try to
understand how it works. Here it is again:

<img src="https://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2016/11/26/code2.png"/>

Reading the 6 instructions inside of <span class="code">add_forty_two</span>,
there are three different operations going on. First, we setup a new stack
frame for our function:

<img src="https://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2016/11/26/code3.png"/>

The stack frame is an area of memory that my code can use to save local
variable and other information. I won’t spend time on this today because my
code is so simple it doesn’t use any local variables. The last two instructions
clean up this stack frame and return to the calling code:

<img src="https://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2016/11/26/code4.png"/>

I won’t cover this today either. In my next article, I’ll go through a slightly
more complicated example containing local variables and explain how x86
assembly code accesses them on the stack.

For today, I want to focus on the two instructions in the middle which actually
implement <span class="code">add_forty_two</span>:

<img src="https://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2016/11/26/code5.png"/>

We’re down to two assembly language instructions, but it’s still far from
obvious what this code means! The key to understanding these two instructions
is to realize that the argument to my function, <span class="code">n</span>, is
passed in using a register:

<img src="https://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2016/11/26/code6.png"/>

We can see this is true by returning to the call site in the <span
class="code">add_forty_two.s</span> file, to the code which calls my function:

<img src="https://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2016/11/26/call-site.png"/>

Note how the first <span class="code">movl</span> instruction copies the value
10 into the <span class="code">edi</span> register (the lower 32 bits of the
<span class="code">rdi</span> register):

<img src="https://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2016/11/26/code7.png"/>

Next the <span class="code">callq</span> instruction calls my function with 10
in <span class="code">edi</span>:

<img src="https://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2016/11/26/code8.png"/>

So when the <span class="code">addl</span> instruction runs, it will add 42 to
the argument 10.

<img src="https://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2016/11/26/code9.png"/>

Next, the <span class="code">movl</span> instruction runs and copies the result
52 from <span class="code">edi</span> to <span class="code">eax</span>:

<img src="https://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2016/11/26/code10.png"/>

This, in turn, becomes the return value from my function:

<img src="https://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2016/11/26/code11.png"/>

Again, we can see this is the case by reading the call site code again:

<img src="https://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2016/11/26/call-site.png"/>

What happens after <span class="code">add_forty_two</span> returns? It moves
<span class="code">%eax</span>, the return value, to <span
class="code">%edi</span> where it becomes the argument to a second function
call, the call to <span class="code">puts</span>.

I’m not sure whether this pattern of using the <span class="code">%edi</span>
and <span class="code">%eax</span> registers to hold the function arguments and
return values is a x86 standard convention. My guess is that instead it’s a
pattern the LLVM code generator uses. It may be that LLVM only uses this
technique for a single argument and single return value function like <span
class="code">add_forty_two</span>.

## Next Time

I haven’t done much, but already I’m beginning to understand x86 assembly
language. Almost unintelligible when I first saw it, now I can start to follow
what the machine instructions do when my code is executed. The key was learning
how the instruction and register names change depending on the size of the
value they operate on.

There’s much more to learn, of course. In my next article I’ll take a look at
how an x86 microprocessor uses the stack to save values, and how this maps to
Ruby using a slightly more complex example. Along the way I’ll learn about a
few more important syntax rules of x86 assembly language.
